# Minutes of the OGC O&M SWG meeting 26 February 2020

Time: 2020-02-26 at 11:00 EET

Place: Remotely (GoToMeeting), [recording](https://portal.ogc.org/files/?artifact_id=92160) available in the OGC Portal (requires Portal access).

Participants (voting members in bold):

* **Ilkka Rinne (IR)**
* **Kathi Schleidt (KS)**
* **Hylke van der Schaaf (HS)**
* **Clemens Portele**
* **Sylvain Grellet** (by proxy to Kathi)
* **Linda van den Brink (LB)**

Status: approved (2020-03-11)

## 1. Check for quorum, patent call
Quorum reached, 6 participants from 6 voting member organisations represented with Sylvain's proxy to Kathi.

No affecting patents were identified.

## 2. Approval of the minutes of the previous meeting

The [minutes](https://github.com/opengeospatial/om-swg/blob/master/meetings/2020-02-19_om-swg_minutes.md) of the SWG meeting held on 19 Feb 2020 were approved.

## 3. O&M update at the Ottawa TC
IR told that although no in-person SWG meeting was scheduled for the Ottawa TC meeting  on the following week, he was working on an update report on the O&M SWG progress and the updated schedule to be posted in the Closing Plenary meeting folder.

KS pointed out that the SWG had been facing data modelling and UML issues that may require common addressing and guidance within the OGC. She argued that bridging between the semantic OWL type of data modelling and the traditional feature/GML type data modelling would benefit from general guidance applicable outside of the O&M context. CP asked what KS was missing in addition to the guidance included in the UML standard, ISO 19109 and 19103? KS said that one was the issue on the has/is role names used in many of the RDF models vs. the brief names favoured in the ISO standards. The other in her mind was the question of the semantic correctness of the abstract UML class hierarchy discussed within the in the ObservationCollection modelling. CP told that he did not think any of these issues were really linked to UML, although some the techical issues were UML specific, like that fact that you cannot derive a DataType from a Class. KS asked how to deal with the fact that deriving both an observation and an observation collection from an abstract observation class was semantically incorrect? CP replied that one has to find a supertype definition that captures the common bits, and that he did not see any difference in this whether UML of OWL was used for modelling. KS argued that she disagreed, and saw this as something to address on a wider forum than O&M SWG.

IR asked how KS wanted the SWG to bring this up in the OGC-wide discussions? He told that writing a few bullets on the matter in the SWG report would probably not suffice for bringing this issue up to a general discussion. It was agreed that the SWG members keep these ideas in mind for the Montreal TC meeting to be held in June.

IR told that he would send the link to the SWG report to the mailing list.

## 4. Priority topic 1:Observation collections: homogenous & grab-bag (continued)
IR opened the discussion be brifing the participants on the three alternative options for the UML collection UML model posted be him into the [Github issues comments](https://github.com/opengeospatial/om-swg/issues/2#issuecomment-590757826) on 25 Feb. The option 1 was one was very close what was agreed on in the previous meeting, where both the AbstractObservation and the ObservationCollection were derived from a common super class ObservationDescription, and thus inherited all the properties defined for it. He noted that while the ObservationDescription was an abstract class, its name was not prefixed with the word "Abstract". KS asked CP if there was a guidance to follow on naming the abstract classes. CP replied that while different communities had different preferences on this, there was not clear guidance in ISO for using the Abstract name prefix. Personally he was not in favour of mechanically adding theis prefix in the class names unless it was useful for understanding the model. IR agreed, he did not see an added value for prefixing all the names of all the abstract classes in the model, such as Platform, System, Observer etc., with the word "Abstract". KS made a point that in order for the O&M model to be implementable without the need to create additional concrete UML classes it the application schemas, there would have to be also basic concrete classes for the abstract ones. She argued that the simple basic types for these classes should be included at least in the XML implementation specification. IR agreed that there would have to be a core [of the O&M] which would be implementable on it's own. 

KS asked if there were any better suggestions to the collection names than "Homogenous" and "Summarizing" observation collections, as these names were rather long. Nobody had better suggestions readily in mind, and IR asked people to add any later suggestions to the Github issue.

KS asked on the level of formalism required for the class constraints. IR told that currently most of the constraints were given in plain text, but it they should prbably be formalized as OCL at some point. KS asked CP if the OCL contstraints would be automatically transformed into Schematron rules in the automated UML-to-XML Schema conversion process, such as the one implemented with ShapeChange. CP replied that it depended on the OCL expressions used, but for ShapeChange the OCL constraints that map nicely into Schematron/XPath expressions are carried over in the conversion. CP noted that currently the constraints of the UML classes for a mixed bag: some are more formal than others. He also pointed out that some of the current constraints would be very hard to turn into automated tests, such as the one stating that "usedProcedure shall be suitable for the combination of the associated observedProperties". KS agreed that this one could be be automatically tested, but what about the ones in the ObservationCollection classes? CP replied that it would be interesting to see how the collection constraints would look like in OCL, and added that even the participants would probably not create the same OCL for this.

IR then moved into the option 2, in which the collections were not derived from the ObservationDescription, but rather referred to an instance of it for capturing the shared and contained properties of the Homogenous and the Summarizing collections respectively. KS told that she liked this option more due to the added flexibility of being able to define the ObservationDescription as standa-alone entity, to which one or more of the collections would refer to. In this respect it resembled the observation template idea proposed by IR earlier. CP noted that the ObservationDescription class would have to made into a concrete one in order for this to work, as he had commented also in the Github issue. Also the cardinalities of the ObservationDescription propoerties would have to be 0..n to be able to capture the entire value ranges of the Observation propoerties occurring in the members of a SummarizingObservationCollection. 

In the third option the generalization association between the AbstractObservation and the ObservationDescription was turned into the opposite direction compared to the option 2.
IR also noted that the derivation of the ObservationDescription (DataType) from the AbstractObservation (FeatureType) was wrong as pointed out by CP in Github. KS mentioned that the dagram looked cleaner that the the option 2. IR told that this was due defining the relations between the collection and the ObservationDescription classes using attribute rather than an association, which he thought had been consistent with defining the ObservationDescription as a DataType. KS asked CP if there was a difference in using using the attribute or association here. CP replied that the attribute relation was in essence the same as using the composition association: the collection classes would then own the shared/contained properties and they could be exist outside the collection objects. KS commented that in this case the option 2 with associations would be better.

CP summarized that the ObservationDescription would be turned into a concreate classe, and that the group would be looking for better names for the ObservationDescription, HomogenousObservationCollection and SummarizingObservationCollection. He asked if the definitions of these three classes had already been written down somewhere? IR told that this had not yet been done. CP commented that doing this would propbably help in defing better terms for them.

There was an agreement that the option 2 with the modifications as suggested was the best route forward. KS commented that the details of the how the common class hierarchy were still open. KS also asked IR to got throught the constraints and formalize them.

IR noted that the one thing bothering him about the SummarizingObservationCollection was that when creating this kind of collection someone had to pre-select the interesting properties to include on the collection level, as the collection would be have to contain all the values of all the observation properties occuring in the member Observations. KS argued that the semantics of the SummarizingObservationCollection would be that all the Observation propoerties would be given at the collection level, and not just a few selected ones. IR commented that this would then mean including all the results too, as a category or enumeration type results would be good candidates for common properties in some cases, as discussed before. HS commented that he was pretty sure there were cases where it did not make sense to include value ranges of all the properties. IR summmarized by saying that the selection of the included properties would then have to be left to the implementations. 

## 5. Other priority topics

**The use of the "has/is" association role prefix**

IR showed the latest UML model draft explaining that the has/is pattern had now been removed in this version. KS argued that it was still somewhat present in the "usedProcedure" name. She noted that this name used to be the just "procedure" in the O&M 2.0, so there should be a good reason for changing it. IR replied that semantics of this association had in fact been changed since the ProcessUsed assocation in 2.0 had now been split into the "usedProcess" and the "madeBy" associations. 

IR wanted to bring the the discussion back to the issue of using the has/is prefix. KS commented that she did not like it because for consistency it would have to be used with all the associations, and it would make the the names uncessarily long. CP told that he did not really have a strong opinion on this, but he noted that using the prefixes may result in push back in the ISO reviews since it's not in line with the recommendations and current practice in the ISO models. LB commented that in UML the association itself may have a name in addition to the role names. What she said she usually does is use a verb for the association names and nouns for the target role names. She pointed out that in the current UML model a noun "usedProcedure" was used for in the role name for the association between the ObservationDescription and the Procedure, but a verb "hosts" was used between the Platform and the System, which was inconsistent. LB told that in SOSA or RDF in general the relationships are named, but it's not the same thing as the target role. KS commented that this was a further difference between UML and semantic technologies. KS argued that in fact in SOSA only the target roles were named and not the associations: there was a directed relation from the sosa:Platform to the ssn:System named "hosts" and an inverse relation "isHostedBy". The current O&M UML draft is somewhere between the the practices since the role name of the inverse association in "hostedBy" and not isHostedBy".

KS proposed going through all the association role names used in the draft model and to check that they are consistently given. She promised to create a table for this and put in Github. She liked LB's idea of using the noun vs. verb names, and that something was bothering her with the current names, but she could not yet pin point what it was.

KS raised a point of the directionality of the associations in the model: some are bi-directional, some not. She told that she agreed that it probably did not make sense to make all the associations navigable in both directions, but the she liked the notion of giving names for also for the non-navigable association roles so that if the role was being made navigable in a an application schema, the name would alreary have been thougth of. CP commented that KS made a good point that if we wanted to enable the discovery of Observations made about a particular FoI then the association would have to be made navigable from AnyFeature to ObservationDescription with a role name. This was a semantic, or conceptual decision this group needs to do. KS arged that in the O&M 2.0 the role name for the association from the target feature to Observation was given, but the association was only navigable to th other direction, which had lead into need for adding the inverse link in the application level models, such as the INSPIRE EF, in inconsistent ways. Thus she wished to include guidance in the O&M spec on which name should be used if an inverse direction would be introduced in the application schemas. KS agreed to make the first draft of the association role name table to be commonly worked with, including the navigability of the associations.

LB pointed that the ObservationCollections could also be used to group Observations about a specific feature. She asked whether by adding the inverse associations in the model, such as the one from the Observer to ObservationDescription, we tried to solve a thing that was already solved using the ObservationCollections? KS replied that these associations would be used in use cases where the targets of the navigable associations would used for selecting subsets of Observations of particular kinds which would then be grouped into collections. It one wanted to find which Observations were an Observed had made, she could not do it without a navigable association in that directions. LB argued that the link could be followed if all the Observations were included in a collection with the madeBy association as a shared propoerty. CP agreed with KS that the collections were just a way to group Observations, and the associations were needed to traverse the links between the objects. He said he thought it would make sense to make this association bi-directional.

**Platform, System, Observer, Procedure and ObservableProperty**

KS noted that in the current draft version the ObservableProperty class was abstract, but based on the earlier discussion on the content and structure of the observed properties, it was decided to make it a concrete class suitable for a separate extension to be done after the [ISO] O&M revision based on the ideas covered in the Object of Interest and UoM expression object issues. She also noted that the split between the System and the Observer classes still disturbed her. The System concept was included in SSN and not in SOSA, although the sosa:Platform has the "hosts" relation to ssn:System. IR told that he had added the System in the diagram due to the fact it was also the super class of the SOSA Sampler. KS stated that the question would be if we would really be adding the Sampler level of detail in the O&M conceptual model. If not, then the System would also not be needed. There was a general agreement between the participants that the System concept was not required in O&M, as it was just an abstract empty class, and that it should be taken out. CP suggested that for consistence the "implement/implementedBy" association between Procedure and System would also be removed, as it was also defined in SSN rather that SOSA. 

## 6. Priority topic for the next week
* ObservationCollections (continued)
* Harmonization of the association naming, cardinalities, navigabilities

## 7. Other issues
It was decided that the descriptions for the classes would be drafted as a markdown document in the Github. KS agreed to create the initial version of the docuemnt. LB and CP told that they would probably not be joining the meeting on 4th March due to the Ottawa TC.